docs(release): document PyPI publish process for python client (#1610)
apache/datafusion-ballista: dev/release/README.md

(cd ballista-cli && cargo publish)
```

### Publish Python Wheels to PyPI

Only approved releases of the tarball should be published to PyPI, in order to
conform to Apache Software Foundation governance standards. The Python wheels
that get uploaded must be the same artifacts that the community voted on — they
are downloaded from the release candidate's CI run, not rebuilt.

#### Prerequisites

> A DataFusion committer can publish the [`ballista` package on

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A DataFusion PMC member can publish the [`ballista` package on
```

PyPI](https://pypi.org/project/ballista/) after an official project release has
been made. One-time setup:

- Create accounts on [pypi.org](https://pypi.org) and
  [test.pypi.org](https://test.pypi.org) (separate accounts).
- Ask an existing maintainer of the `ballista` PyPI project — listed on the
  project page — to add you as a maintainer. The request should be made on the
  dev mailing list so it is publicly tracked.
- Generate project-scoped API tokens for both PyPI and TestPyPI.
- Configure `~/.pypirc`:

  ```ini
  [distutils]
  index-servers =
      pypi
      testpypi

  [pypi]
  username = __token__
  password = pypi-...

  [testpypi]
  repository = https://test.pypi.org/legacy/
  username = __token__
  password = pypi-...
  ```

- Install `twine`:

  ```bash

>   pip install twine

Reviewer: https://github.com/apache/datafusion-ballista/blob/68dfeddeeedec3382cfcae0a4139af7005dc3eac/dev/release/download-python-wheels.py#L23 also says that `requests` is needed

Author: Added, the install step now does `pip install twine requests`.

RC commit does not trigger a fresh build, so the RC artifacts remain the
canonical source.

```bash
export GH_TOKEN=...     # GitHub PAT with read access to actions
mkdir ballista-pypi-<version> && cd ballista-pypi-<version>
python ../dev/release/download-python-wheels.py <version>-rc<N>
ls *.whl *.tar.gz       # confirm filenames carry the right version
```

The merged artifact should contain one of each of the following platform wheels
(file naming uses [PEP 425](https://peps.python.org/pep-0425/) tags):

- `ballista-<version>-cp310-abi3-manylinux_2_17_x86_64.manylinux2014_x86_64.whl`
- `ballista-<version>-cp310-abi3-manylinux_2_17_aarch64.manylinux2014_aarch64.whl`
- `ballista-<version>-cp310-abi3-macosx_*_arm64.whl`
- `ballista-<version>-cp310-abi3-win_amd64.whl`
- `ballista-<version>.tar.gz` (sdist)

> **Known CI caveat:** the merged artifact currently contains the macOS arm64
> wheel twice (jobs `build-python-mac-win`'s macOS leg and `build-macos-x86_64`
> both run on `macos-latest`, which is now arm64) and **no** macOS x86_64 wheel.
> Keep one copy of the arm64 wheel and delete any duplicate before upload.

> > Tracked in [#1608](https://github.com/apache/datafusion-ballista/issues/1608).

Reviewer: Not sure this note is needed here.
The issue will be resolved soon (before next release).

Author: You were right that #1608 is closed (by #1612 dropping Intel Mac), so the specific arm64-duplicate note is gone. While testing today though I hit a different problem with the same `merge-build-artifacts` job: the merged `dist` artifact was missing the manylinux aarch64 wheel and the sdist, even though the per-platform jobs all succeeded. I replaced the note with a broader caveat that calls out checking every expected file and falling back to the per-platform `dist-*` artifacts if any are missing. Also added a side note that `build-sdist` currently has no upload-artifact step at all, so the sdist may be absent regardless.

SVN — PyPI rejects them. Pass explicit globs to `twine` so only the wheels and
sdist are considered.

#### TestPyPI Dry-Run

PyPI uploads are immutable: once a version is published it cannot be replaced
or re-uploaded, only yanked. A TestPyPI dry-run takes a few minutes and catches
the common ways a release goes wrong.

```bash
twine upload --repository testpypi *.whl *.tar.gz

python -m venv /tmp/ballista-pypi-smoke
source /tmp/ballista-pypi-smoke/bin/activate
pip install -i https://test.pypi.org/simple/ \
    --extra-index-url https://pypi.org/simple/ \
    ballista==<version>
python -c "from ballista import BallistaSessionContext; print('ok')"
deactivate
```

`--extra-index-url` is required because TestPyPI does not mirror dependencies
like `pyarrow` and `datafusion`.

#### Upload to PyPI

```bash
twine upload *.whl *.tar.gz
```

If the upload fails partway through, re-run with `--skip-existing` to retry only
the files that did not get through.

#### Verify

Confirm the new version appears at
`https://pypi.org/project/ballista/<version>/`. Then in another fresh
virtual environment:

```bash
python -m venv /tmp/ballista-pypi-verify
source /tmp/ballista-pypi-verify/bin/activate

> pip install ballista==<version>

Reviewer: Idea: Instead of using `<version>` I'd suggest to use `${BALLISTA_VERSION}` that is defined earlier. This way the release manager could just copy/paste/run the code without any manual edits.

Author: Done. Introduced `BALLISTA_VERSION` and `BALLISTA_RC_NUM` at the top of the section and replaced every `<version>` in the PyPI publish section with `${BALLISTA_VERSION}`. Pre-existing `<version>` placeholders in earlier sections of this doc are left as-is so the convention there stays consistent.

```

### Publish Python Wheels to PyPI

Only approved releases of the tarball should be published to PyPI, in order to
conform to Apache Software Foundation governance standards. The Python wheels
that get uploaded must be the same artifacts that the community voted on — they
are downloaded from the release candidate's CI run, not rebuilt.

#### Prerequisites

A DataFusion committer can publish the [`ballista` package on
PyPI](https://pypi.org/project/ballista/) after an official project release has
been made. One-time setup:

- Create accounts on [pypi.org](https://pypi.org) and
  [test.pypi.org](https://test.pypi.org) (separate accounts).
- Ask an existing maintainer of the `ballista` PyPI project — listed on the
  project page — to add you as a maintainer. The request should be made on the
  dev mailing list so it is publicly tracked.
- Generate project-scoped API tokens for both PyPI and TestPyPI.
- Configure `~/.pypirc`:

  ```ini
  [distutils]
  index-servers =
      pypi
      testpypi

  [pypi]
  username = __token__
  password = pypi-...

  [testpypi]
  repository = https://test.pypi.org/legacy/
  username = __token__
  password = pypi-...

>   ```

Reviewer: - Secure ~/.pypirc
```bash
chmod 600 ~/.pypirc
```

Author: Added as a step right after the `~/.pypirc` configuration.
